src/content/docs/conditions/index.mdx, before:

---
title: Overview
description: Thresholds and situations where continuation inside an environment is no longer neutral.
---

Conditions is the layer of this site that deals with thresholds.

Foundations defines the vocabulary. Mechanisms explains how influence accumulates. Conditions describes what happens when accumulation crosses a line and the environment begins to bias judgment in a directional way.

A condition is not a mood. It is not a style. It is a stable description of what an environment does to posture over time. Conditions matter because they indicate when remaining inside a field changes more than comfort. It changes tolerance, patience, interpretive bandwidth, and willingness to continue.

This section focuses on moments where continuation stops being a passive default. These are not necessarily dramatic situations. The most common thresholds are quiet. They appear as delay, drift, impatience, and reduced capacity to hold uncertainty.

Read Conditions after Foundations and Mechanisms. Use the pages here as diagnostic lenses. The goal is not to label every space as harmful. The goal is to recognize when a space is actively shaping judgment so that continuation becomes a choice that carries weight.

Start with Environments That Delay Judgment if you want to understand prolonged pre-judgment states. Then read When Continuation Is No Longer Neutral to understand the threshold condition that makes ongoing exposure directional rather than background.

Commit message:

Update CSS and add definition blocks

src/content/docs/conditions/index.mdx, after:

---
title: Overview
description: When continuation inside an environment becomes non-neutral.
---

**Definition.** Conditions describes threshold states: the point at which continuing inside an environment stops being neutral and begins to reshape posture of judgment.

This matters because many environments are not “bad,” but they are not stable either. They delay decision-making, distort patience, and change what people will tolerate—without ever announcing themselves as a problem.

This page will give you a way to recognize when an environment has crossed from background into active influence.

## What Conditions covers

This layer focuses on:

- Delay and drift (when spaces slow judgment without clarity)
- Non-neutral continuation (when staying changes what “reasonable” feels like)
- Threshold cues (signals that the environment is now shaping outcomes)

## Recommended first sequence in Conditions

1. **Environments That Delay Judgment**
2. **When Continuation Is No Longer Neutral**
