src/content/docs/starthere.mdx, before:

---
title: Start here
description: A guided path through The Space As.
---

The Space As is a documentation site about how interior-dominant environments shape perception and judgment before conscious decision-making occurs.

This is not a design blog. It is a vocabulary and framework for describing the conditions that quietly determine how people think, wait, and decide inside spaces.

## How to read this site

If you are new, start with **Foundations** to understand what “space as condition” means.

Then read **Mechanisms** to see how slow-acting influence accumulates over time through surfaces, light behavior, and visual load.

Finally, read **Conditions** to understand when continuation inside an environment is no longer neutral—when space begins to change the posture of judgment itself.

## Recommended first sequence

1. Foundations → Overview
2. Foundations → Space as Psychological Infrastructure
3. Mechanisms → Overview
4. Mechanisms → Visual Density and Cognitive Load
5. Conditions → Overview
6. Conditions → When Continuation Is No Longer Neutral

Commit message:

Clarify reading paths in About and Reading Guide

src/content/docs/starthere.mdx, after:

---
title: Reading Guide
description: How to navigate the system and what to read first.
---

**Definition.** Reading Guide is the shortest path through the system: a map that tells you what each layer does and what to read first.

This matters because the site is designed as a documentation structure, not a timeline. Without a guided path, readers often treat pages as isolated essays and miss the intended sequence.

This page gives a recommended first sequence, an alternative reading mode for returning readers, and a simple rule for deciding where a topic belongs.

## ## Beginner sequence (recommended first read)

1. Foundations → Overview  
2. Foundations → Space Is Felt Before It Is Seen  
3. Foundations → Space as Psychological Infrastructure  
4. Mechanisms → Overview  
5. Mechanisms → Slow-Acting Background Regulation  
6. Mechanisms → Visual Density and Cognitive Load  
7. Conditions → Overview  
8. Conditions → When Continuation Is No Longer Neutral  

## Two ways to read

**Mode A — Learn the vocabulary (first visit).**  
Start in Foundations, then read Mechanisms, then Conditions. Treat this like definitions → dynamics → thresholds.

**Mode B — Use it as reference (returning).**  
Start from the most relevant Overview page (Foundations/Mechanisms/Conditions) and follow internal links. You do not need to read linearly once the structure is familiar.

## Where a page belongs

Use this rule:

- If the page defines terms or first principles, it belongs in **Foundations**.  
- If it explains accumulation over time or perceptual mechanics, it belongs in **Mechanisms**.  
- If it describes a threshold state—when “continuation becomes non-neutral”—it belongs in **Conditions**.
